# Summary

In the preceding sections we have given you a lot of advice on how to be more
efficient in crafting your software and to create software that will be robust
and maintainable. As we said at the outset, these rules are not chiseled in
stone but, rather, molded in clay and can be remolded into something that might
work better for you and your team.If this all seems overwhelming, we offer the
following advice: don’t try to master all these techniques at once. Try
implementing one or two of the techniques and try them out before moving on to
others. If you were to pick a couple practices to begin with, we suggest
familiarizing yourself with how to effectively use a version control system and
then move on to test-driven development.


If you are the only contributor to your software project or you are working
with a team, you should start with some publicly accessible version control
system (e.g. GitHub). Even if you aren’t writing software as part of a team—and
maybe you don’t ever intend to—it is the nature of scientific software that in
the future someone will want to pick up your work and either use it or
contribute to it to solve some new problem. In fact, this should really be a
goal from the outset—to build software that someone else will use or even
extend to answer new questions. With your code in a version control system, a
new user (or contributor) will be able to easily find your code and have a
history of what you have done. Not only will your code be visible but also the
development process (as online issues and discussion) so that members of your
team (or other interested scientists) who may not be code-contributors can also
take part in the development—even if it’s just as observers. Moving your
project to a publicly accessible version control system will help to foster a
collaborative environment where software is more easily shared and contributed
to by a community. 

