# Why?

In the next section we outline some best practices you can use in your software
project that will make you a more effective programmer. The guidelines are
often specific and technical. If you are a programmer you can take some or all
of these suggestions and immediately incorporate them into your daily workflow.
If you find yourself more on the software management side, don’t worry, there
will be something for you as well. We provide a list of practices as a sort of
choose-your-own-adventure novel—feel free to jump around, take what works for
you and leave what doesn't.

Even if you are not the one writing code but are, perhaps, managing scientific
software projects, there will be something here for you too. Although much of
the advice that follows is technical, it is important that you see how,
following some easy-to-implement guidelines, your software projects can advance
more quickly, be more robust and pass from generation to generation with ease. 


Well-crafted software allows developers who are unfamiliar with the software
(an incoming graduate student new to the team, for example) to take up and run
with the software in short order. Over time, software that follows these
principles will become increasingly more robust as these practices build upon
themselves and strengthen with time. Just as poor practices lead to compounding
debt, even just pretty good practices will earn your project interest.


On the other hand, poorly crafted software—while possibly seeing a fast initial
pace of development—will soon turn into a mess and become increasingly more
fragile and difficult to maintain. This is the difference between your software
increasing in quality by 1% each day or decreasing by that amount. In the first
case, quality increases exponentially as opposed to collapsing and going
bankrupt.

